<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 id="INTRODUCTION_II">II<br />
<span class="smaller">THE BEGGAR</span></h2>

<p>One cold December day a beggar came wandering
up the slopes of Broby. He was dressed in the
most miserable rags, and his shoes were so worn that
the cold snow wet his feet.</p>

<p>Löfven is a long, narrow lake in Värmland, intersected
in several places by long narrow sounds. In the
north it stretches up to the Finn forests, in the south
down to the lake Väner. There are many parishes
along its shores, but the parish of Bro is the largest
and richest. It takes up a large part of the lake’s
shores both on the east and west sides, but on the
west side are the largest estates, such as Ekeby and
Björne, known far and wide for wealth and beauty,
and Broby, with its large village and inn, courthouse,
sheriff-quarters, vicarage, and market-place.</p>

<p>Broby lies on a steep slope. The beggar had
come past the inn, which lies at the foot of the hill,
and was struggling up towards the parsonage, which
lies at the top.</p>

<p>A little girl went in front of him up the hill; she
dragged a sledge laden with a bag of meal. The
beggar caught up with the child and began to talk
to her.</p>

<p>“A little horse for such a heavy load,” he said.</p>

<p>The child turned and looked at him. She was a
little creature about twelve years old, with sharp,
suspicious eyes, and lips pressed together.</p>

<p>“Would to God the horse was smaller and the
load larger; it might last longer,” answered the
girl.</p>

<p>“Is it then your own food you are dragging
home?”</p>

<p>“By God’s grace it is; I have to get my own food,
although I am so little.”</p>

<p>The beggar seized the sled rope to drag it up.</p>

<p>The girl turned and looked at him.</p>

<p>“You needn’t think that you will get anything
for this,” she said.</p>

<p>The beggar laughed.</p>

<p>“You must be the daughter of the Broby clergyman.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, I am indeed. Many have poorer fathers,
but none have worse. That’s the Lord’s truth, although
it’s a shame that his own child should have
to say it.”</p>

<p>“I hear he is mean and ill-natured, your father.”</p>

<p>“Mean he is, and ill-natured he is, but they say
his daughter will be worse if she lives so long; that’s
what people say.”</p>

<p>“I fancy people are right. What I would like to
know is, where you found this meal-bag.”</p>

<p>“It makes no difference if I tell you. I took the
grain out of father’s store-house this morning, and
now I have been to the mill.”</p>

<p>“May he not see you when you come dragging it
behind you?”</p>

<p>“You have left school too early. Father is away
on his parish visits, can’t you see?”</p>

<p>“Somebody is driving up the hill behind us; I
hear the creaking of the runners. Think if it were
he who is coming!”</p>

<p>The girl listened and peered down, then she burst
into tears.</p>

<p>“It is father,” she sobbed. “He will kill me! He
will kill me!”</p>

<p>“Yes, good advice is now precious, and prompt
advice better than silver and gold,” said the beggar.</p>

<p>“Look here,” said the child, “you can help me.
Take the rope and drag the sledge; then father will
believe it is yours.”</p>

<p>“What shall I do with it afterwards?” asked the
beggar, and put the rope round his shoulders.</p>

<p>“Take it where you like for the moment, but
come up to the parsonage with it when it is dark.
I shall be looking out for you. You are to come
with the bag and the sledge, you understand.”</p>

<p>“I shall try.”</p>

<p>“God help you if you don’t come!” called the
girl, while she ran, hurrying to get home before her
father.</p>

<p>The beggar turned the sledge with a heavy heart
and dragged it down to the inn.</p>

<p>The poor fellow had had his dream, as he went in
the snow with half-naked feet. He had thought of
the great woods north of lake Löfven, of the great
Finn forests.</p>

<p>Here in the parish of Bro, where he was now
wandering along the sound which connects the upper
and lower Löfven,—in this rich and smiling country,
where one estate joins another, factory lies near factory—here
all the roads seemed to him too heavy,
the rooms too small, the beds too hard. Here he
longed for the peace of the great, eternal forests.</p>



<p>Here he heard the blows echoing in all the barns
as they threshed out the grain. Loads of timber and
charcoal-vans kept coming down from the inexhaustible
forests. Endless loads of metal followed the
deep ruts which the hundreds gone before had cut.
Here he saw sleighs filled with travellers speed from
house to house, and it seemed to him as if pleasure
held the reins, and beauty and love stood on the
runners. Oh, how he longed for the peace of the
forest.</p>

<p>There the trees rise straight and pillarlike from
the even ground, there the snow rests in heavy layers
on the motionless pines, there the wind is powerless
and only plays softly in the topmost leaves, there he
would wander deeper and still farther in, until at last
his strength would fail him, and he would drop under
the great trees, dying of hunger and cold.</p>

<p>He longed for the great murmuring grave above
the Löfven, where he would be overcome by the
powers of annihilation, where at last hunger, cold,
fatigue, and brandy should succeed in destroying his
poor body, which had endured everything.</p>

<p>He came down to the inn to await the evening.
He went into the bar-room and threw himself down
on a bench by the door, dreaming of the eternal
forests.</p>

<p>The innkeeper’s wife felt sorry for him and gave
him a glass of brandy. She even gave him another,
he implored her so eagerly.</p>

<p>But more she would not give him, and the beggar
was in despair. He must have more of the strong,
sweet brandy. He must once again feel his heart
dance in his body and his thoughts flame up in intoxication.
Oh, that sweet spirit of the corn!</p>



<p>The summer sun, the song of the birds, perfume
and beauty floated in its white wave. Once more,
before he disappears into the night and the darkness,
let him drink sunshine and happiness.</p>

<p>So he bartered first the meal, then the meal-sack,
and last the sledge, for brandy. On it he got thoroughly
drunk, and slept the greater part of the afternoon
on a bench in the bar-room.</p>

<p>When he awoke he understood that there was left
for him only one thing to do. Since his miserable
body had taken possession of his soul, since he had
been capable of drinking up what a child had confided
to him, since he was a disgrace to the earth, he
must free it of the burden of such wretchedness. He
must give his soul its liberty, let it go to its God.</p>

<p>He lay on the bench in the bar-room and passed
sentence on himself: “Gösta Berling, dismissed priest,
accused of having drunk up the food of a hungry
child, is condemned to death. What death? Death
in the snow-drifts.”</p>

<p>He seized his cap and reeled out. He was neither
quite awake nor quite sober. He wept in pity for
himself, for his poor, soiled soul, which he must set
free.</p>

<p>He did not go far, and did not turn from the road.
At the very roadside lay a deep drift, and there he
threw himself down to die. He closed his eyes and
tried to sleep.</p>

<p>No one knows how long he lay there; but there
was still life in him when the daughter of the minister
of Broby came running along the road with a lantern
in her hand, and found him in the drift by the roadside.
She had stood for hours and waited for him;
now she had run down Broby hill to look for him.</p>



<p>She recognized him instantly, and she began to
shake him and to scream with all her might to get
him awake.</p>

<p>She must know what he had done with her meal-bag.</p>

<p>She must call him back to life, at least for so long a
time that he could tell her what had become of her
sledge and her meal-bag. Her father would kill her
if she had lost his sledge. She bit the beggar’s finger
and scratched his face, and at the same time she
screamed madly.</p>

<p>Then some one came driving along the road.</p>

<p>“Who the devil is screaming so?” asked a harsh
voice.</p>

<p>“I want to know what this fellow has done with my
meal-bag and my sledge,” sobbed the child, and beat
with clenched fists on the beggar’s breast.</p>

<p>“Are you clawing a frozen man? Away with you,
wild-cat!”</p>

<p>The traveller was a large and coarse woman. She
got out of the sleigh and came over to the drift. She
took the child by the back of the neck and threw her
on one side. Then she leaned over, thrust her arms
under the beggar’s body, and lifted him up. Then
she carried him to the sleigh and laid him in it.</p>

<p>“Come with me to the inn, wild-cat,” she called to
the child, “that we may hear what you know of all
this.”</p>

<hr class="tb" />

<p>An hour later the beggar sat on a chair by the
door in the best room of the inn, and in front of him
stood the powerful woman who had rescued him
from the drift.</p>

<p>Just as Gösta Berling now saw her, on her way
home from the charcoal kilns, with sooty hands, and
a clay-pipe in her mouth, dressed in a short, unlined
sheepskin jacket and striped homespun skirt, with
tarred shoes on her feet and a sheath-knife in her
bosom, as he saw her with gray hair combed back
from an old, beautiful face, so had he heard her described
a thousand times, and he knew that he had
come across the far-famed major’s wife of Ekeby.</p>

<p>She was the most influential woman in all Värmland,
mistress of seven iron-works, accustomed to
command and to be obeyed; and he was only a poor,
condemned man, stripped of everything, knowing that
every road was too heavy for him, every room too
crowded. His body shook with terror, while her
glance rested on him.</p>

<p>She stood silent and looked at the human wretchedness
before her, the red, swollen hands, the emaciated
form, and the splendid head, which even in its
ruin and neglect shone in wild beauty.</p>

<p>“You are Gösta Berling, the mad priest?” she said,
peering at him.</p>

<p>The beggar sat motionless.</p>

<p>“I am the mistress of Ekeby.”</p>

<p>A shudder passed over the beggar’s body. He
clasped his hands and raised his eyes with a longing
glance. What would she do with him? Would she
force him to live? He shook before her strength.
And yet he had so nearly reached the peace of the
eternal forests.</p>

<p>She began the struggle by telling him the minister’s
daughter had got her sledge and her meal-sack again,
and that she, the major’s wife, had a shelter for him
as for so many other homeless wretches in the bachelor’s
wing at Ekeby.</p>



<p>She offered him a life of idleness and pleasure, but
he answered he must die.</p>

<p>Then she struck the table with her clenched fist
and let him hear what she thought of him.</p>

<p>“So you want to die, that’s what you want. That
would not surprise me, if you were alive. Look, such
a wasted body and such powerless limbs and such
dull eyes, and you think that there is something left
of you to die. Do you think that you have to lie
stiff and stark with a coffin-lid nailed down over you
to be dead? Don’t you believe that I stand here and
see how dead you are, Gösta Berling?</p>

<p>“I see that you have a skull for a head, and it seems
to me as if the worms were creeping out of the
sockets of your eyes. Do you not feel that your
mouth is full of dust? Do you not hear how your
bones rattle when you move?</p>

<p>“You have drowned yourself in brandy, Gösta Berling,
and you are dead.</p>

<p>“That which now moves in you is only death
spasms, and you will not allow them to live, if you call
that life. It is just as if you grudged the dead a dance
over the graves in the starlight.</p>

<p>“Are you ashamed that you were dismissed, since
you wish to die now? It would have been more to
your honor had you made use of your gifts and been
of some use on God’s green earth, I tell you. Why
did you not come directly to me? I should have
arranged everything for you. Yes, now you expect
much glory from being wrapped in a winding-sheet
and laid on saw-dust and called a beautiful
corpse.”</p>

<p>The beggar sat calm, almost smiling, while she
thundered out her angry words. There was no danger,
he rejoiced, no danger. The eternal forests wait, and
she has no power to turn thy soul from them.</p>

<p>But the major’s wife was silent and walked a couple
of times up and down the room; then she took a seat
before the fire, put her feet on the fender, and leaned
her elbows on her knees.</p>

<p>“Thousand devils!” she said, and laughed softly to
herself. “It is truer, what I am saying, than I myself
thought. Don’t you believe, Gösta Berling, that most
of the people in this world are dead or half-dead?
Do you think that I am alive? No! No, indeed!</p>

<p>“Yes, look at me! I am the mistress of Ekeby, and
I am the most powerful in Värmland. If I wave one
finger the governor comes, if I wave with two the
bishop comes, and if I wave with three all the chapter
and the aldermen and mine-owners in Värmland dance
to my music in Karlstad’s market-place. A thousand
devils! Boy, I tell you that I am only a dressed-up
corpse. God knows how little life there is in me.”</p>

<p>The beggar leaned forward on his chair and listened
with strained attention. The old woman sat and
rocked before the fire. She did not look at him while
she talked.</p>

<p>“Don’t you know,” she continued, “that if I were
a living being, and saw you sitting there, wretched and
deplorable with suicidal thoughts, don’t you believe
that I should take them out of you in a second? I
should have tears for you and prayers, which would
turn you upside down, and I should save your soul;
but now I am dead.</p>

<p>“Have you heard that I once was the beautiful
Margareta Celsing? That was not yesterday, but I
can still sit and weep my old eyes red for her. Why
shall Margareta Celsing be dead, and Margareta
Samzelius live? Why shall the major’s wife at Ekeby
live?—tell me that, Gösta Berling.</p>

<p>“Do you know what Margareta Celsing was like?
She was slender and delicate and modest and innocent,
Gösta Berling. She was one over whose grave
angels weep.</p>

<p>“She knew nothing of evil, no one had ever given
her pain, she was good to all. And she was beautiful,
really beautiful.</p>

<p>“There was a man, his name was Altringer. God
knows how he happened to be travelling up there in
Älfdal wildernesses, where her parents had their iron-works.
Margareta Celsing saw him; he was a handsome
man, and she loved him.</p>

<p>“But he was poor, and they agreed to wait for one
another five years, as it is in the legend. When three
years had passed another suitor came. He was ugly
and bad, but her parents believed that he was rich,
and they forced Margareta Celsing, by fair means and
foul, by blows and hard words, to take him for her husband.
And that day, you see, Margareta Celsing died.</p>

<p>“After that there was no Margareta Celsing, only
Major Samzelius’s wife, and she was not good nor
modest; she believed in much evil and never thought
of the good.</p>

<p>“You know well enough what happened afterwards.
We lived at Sjö by the Lake Löfven, the major and I.
But he was not rich, as people had said. I often had
hard days.</p>

<p>“Then Altringer came again, and now he was rich.
He became master of Ekeby, which lies next to Sjö;
he made himself master of six other estates by Lake
Löfven. He was able, thrifty; he was a man of
mark.</p>



<p>“He helped us in our poverty; we drove in his
carriages; he sent food to our kitchen, wine to our
cellar. He filled my life with feasting and pleasure.
The major went off to the wars, but what did we care
for that? One day I was a guest at Ekeby, the next
he came to Sjö. Oh, it was like a long dance of
delight on Löfven’s shores.</p>

<p>“But there was evil talk of Altringer and me. If
Margareta Celsing had been living, it would have
given her much pain, but it made no difference to me.
But as yet I did not understand that it was because I
was dead that I had no feeling.</p>

<p>“At last the tales of us reached my father and
mother, as they went among the charcoal kilns up in
Älfdal’s forest. My mother did not stop to think;
she travelled hither to talk to me.</p>

<p>“One day, when the major was away and I sat dining
with Altringer and several others, she arrived. I saw
her come into the room, but I could not feel that she
was my mother, Gösta Berling. I greeted her as a
stranger, and invited her to sit down at my table and
take part in the meal.</p>

<p>“She wished to talk with me, as if I had been her
daughter, but I said to her that she was mistaken,
that my parents were dead, they had both died on my
wedding day.</p>

<p>“Then she agreed to the comedy. She was sixty
years old; a hundred and twenty miles had she driven
in three days. Now she sat without ceremony at the
dinner-table and ate her food; she was a strong and
capable woman.</p>

<p>“She said that it was very sad that I had had such a
loss just on that day.</p>

<p>“‘The saddest thing was,’ I said, ‘that my parents
did not die a day sooner; then the wedding would
never have taken place.’</p>

<p>“‘Is not the gracious lady pleased with her marriage?’
she then asked.</p>

<p>“‘Oh, yes,’ said I, ‘I am pleased. I shall always
be pleased to obey my dear parents’ wish!’</p>

<p>“She asked if it had been my parents’ wish that I
should heap shame upon myself and them and deceive
my husband. I did my parents little honor by making
myself a byword in every man’s mouth.</p>

<p>“‘They must lie as they have made their bed,’ I
answered her. And moreover I wished her to understand,
that I did not intend to allow any one to calumniate
my parents’ daughter.</p>

<p>“We ate, we two. The men about us sat silent and
could not lift knife nor fork.</p>

<p>“She stayed a day to rest, then she went. But all
the time I saw her, I could not understand that she
was my mother. I only knew that my mother was
dead.</p>

<p>“When she was ready to leave, Gösta Berling, and I
stood beside her on the steps, and the carriage was
before the door, she said to me:—</p>

<p>“‘Twenty-four hours have I been here, without your
greeting me as your mother. By lonely roads I came
here, a hundred and twenty miles in three days. And
for shame for you my body is trembling, as if it had
been beaten with rods. May you be disowned, as I
have been disowned, repudiated as I have been repudiated!
May the highway be your home, the hay-stack
your bed, the charcoal-kiln your stove! May
shame and dishonor be your reward; may others strike
you, as I strike you!’</p>

<p>“And she gave me a heavy blow on the cheek.</p>



<p>“But I lifted her up, carried her down the steps, and
put her in her carriage.</p>

<p>“‘Who are you, that you curse me?’ I asked; ‘who
are you that you strike me? That I will suffer from
no one.’</p>

<p>“And I gave her the blow again.</p>

<p>“The carriage drove away, but then, at that moment,
Gösta Berling, I knew that Margareta Celsing was
dead.</p>

<p>“She was good and innocent; she knew no evil.
Angels had wept at her grave. If she had lived, she
would not have struck her mother.”</p>

<p>The beggar by the door had listened, and the words
for a moment had drowned the sound of the eternal
forests’ alluring murmur. For see, this great lady,
she made herself his equal in sin, his sister in perdition,
to give him courage to live. For he should learn
that sorrow and wrong-doing weighed down other
heads than his. He rose and went over to the major’s
wife.</p>

<p>“Will you live now? Gösta Berling?” she asked with
a voice which broke with tears. “Why should you
die? You could have been such a good priest, but
it was never Gösta Berling whom you drowned in
brandy, he as gleamingly innocent-white as that Margareta
Celsing I suffocated in hate. Will you live?”</p>

<p>Gösta fell on his knees before her.</p>

<p>“Forgive me,” he said, “I cannot.”</p>

<p>“I am an old woman, hardened by much sorrow,”
answered the major’s wife, “and I sit here and give
myself as a prize to a beggar, whom I have found
half-frozen in a snow-drift by the roadside. It serves
me right. Let him go and kill himself; then at least
he won’t be able to tell of my folly.”</p>



<p>“I am no suicide, I am condemned to die. Do not
make the struggle too hard for me! I may not live.
My body has taken possession of my soul, therefore
I must let it escape and go to God.”</p>

<p>“And so you believe you will get there?”</p>

<p>“Farewell, and thank you!”</p>

<p>“Farewell, Gösta Berling.”</p>

<p>The beggar rose and walked with hanging head and
dragging step to the door. This woman made the
way up to the great forests heavy for him.</p>

<p>When he came to the door, he had to look back.
Then he met her glance, as she sat still and looked
after him. He had never seen such a change in any
face, and he stood and stared at her. She, who had
just been angry and threatening, sat transfigured, and
her eyes shone with a pitying, compassionate love.</p>

<p>There was something in him, in his own wild heart,
which burst before that glance; he leaned his forehead
against the door-post, stretched his arms up over
his head, and wept as if his heart would break.</p>

<p>The major’s wife tossed her clay-pipe into the fire
and came over to Gösta. Her movements were as tender
as a mother’s.</p>

<p>“There, there, my boy!”</p>

<p>And she got him down beside her on the bench by
the door, so that he wept with his head on her knees.</p>

<p>“Will you still die?”</p>

<p>Then he wished to rush away. She had to hold
him back by force.</p>

<p>“Now I tell you that you may do as you please.
But I promise you that, if you will live, I will take to
me the daughter of the Broby minister and make a
human being of her, so that she can thank her God
that you stole her meal. Now will you?”</p>



<p>He raised his head and looked her right in the eyes.</p>

<p>“Do you mean it?”</p>

<p>“I do, Gösta Berling.”</p>

<p>Then he wrung his hands in anguish. He saw
before him the peering eyes, the compressed lips,
the wasted little hands. This young creature would
get protection and care, and the marks of degradation
be effaced from her body, anger from her soul. Now
the way up to the eternal forests was closed to him.</p>

<p>“I shall not kill myself as long as she is under
your care,” he said. “I knew well enough that you
would force me to live. I felt that you were stronger
than I.”</p>

<p>“Gösta Berling,” she said solemnly, “I have fought
for you as for myself. I said to God: ‘If there is
anything of Margareta Celsing living in me, let her
come forward and show herself, so that this man may
not go and kill himself.’ And He granted it, and you
saw her, and therefore you could not go. And she
whispered to me that for that poor child’s sake you
would give up your plan of dying. Ah, you fly, you
wild birds, but our Lord knows the net which will
catch you.”</p>

<p>“He is a great and wonderful God,” said Gösta
Berling. “He has mocked me and cast me out, but
He will not let me die. May His will be done!”</p>

<p>From that day Gösta Berling became a guest at
Ekeby. Twice he tried to leave and make himself a
way to live by his own work. The first time the
major’s wife gave him a cottage near Ekeby; he
moved thither and meant to live as a laborer. This
succeeded for a while, but he soon wearied of the
loneliness and the daily labor, and again returned as
a guest. There was another time, when he became
tutor at Borg for Count Henry Dohna. During this
time he fell in love with the young Ebba Dohna, the
count’s sister; but when she died, just as he thought
he had nearly won her, he gave up every thought of
being anything but guest at Ekeby. It seemed to
him that for a dismissed priest all ways to make
amends were closed.</p>


</section></body></html>
