<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 id="I_CHAPTER_I">CHAPTER I<br />
<span class="smaller">THE LANDSCAPE</span></h2>

<p>I must now describe the long lake, the rich plains
and the blue mountains, since they were the scene
where Gösta Berling and the other knights of Ekeby
passed their joyous existence.</p>

<p>The lake has its sources far up in the north, and
it is a perfect country for a lake. The forest and
the mountains never cease to collect water for it;
rivulets and brooks stream into it the whole year
round. It has fine white sand to stretch itself over,
headlands and islands to mirror and to look at, river
sprites and sea nymphs have free play room there,
and it quickly grows large and beautiful. There,
in the north, it is smiling and friendly; one needs
but to see it on a summer morning, when it lies half
awake under a veil of mist, to perceive how gay it
is. It plays first for a while, creeps softly, softly,
out of its light covering, so magically beautiful that
one can hardly recognize it; but then it casts from
it, suddenly, the whole covering, and lies there bare
and uncovered and rosy, shining in the morning
light.</p>



<p>But the lake is not content with this life of play;
it draws itself together to a narrow strait, breaks its
way out through the sand-hills to the south, and
seeks out a new kingdom for itself. And such a
one it also finds; it gets larger and more powerful,
has bottomless depths to fill, and a busy landscape
to adorn. And now its water is darker, its shores
less varying, its winds sharper, its whole character
more severe. It has become a stately and magnificent
lake. Many are the ships and the rafts of timber
which pass there; late in the year it finds time
to take its winter rest, rarely before Christmas.
Often is it in peevish mood, when it grows white
with wrath and drags down sailing-boats; but it can
also lie in a dreamy calm and reflect the heavens.</p>

<p>But still farther out into the world will the lake
go, although the mountains become bolder and space
narrower; still farther down it comes, so that it once
again must creep as a narrow strait between sand-bound
shores. Then it broadens out for the third
time, but no longer with the same beauty and
might.</p>

<p>The shores sink down and become tame, gentler
winds blow, the lake takes its winter rest early. It
is still beautiful, but it has lost youth’s giddiness
and manhood’s strength—it is now a lake like any
other. With two arms it gropes after a way to Lake
Vänern, and when that is found it throws itself with
the feebleness of old age over the slopes and goes
with a last thundering leap to rest.</p>

<p>The plain is as long as the lake; but it has no
easy time to find a place between sea and mountain,
all the way from the valley of the basin at the lake’s
northern end, where it first dares to spread itself
out, till it lays itself to easy rest by the Vänern’s
shore. There is no doubt that the plain would
rather follow the shore of the lake, long as it is, but
the mountains give it no peace. The mountains are
mighty granite walls, covered with woods, full of
cliffs difficult to cross, rich in moss and lichen,—in
those old days the home of many wild things.</p>

<p>On the far-stretching ridges one often comes upon
a wet swamp or a pool with dark water. Here and
there is a charcoal kiln or an open patch where timber
and wood have been cut, or a burnt clearing, and
these all bear witness that there is work going on on
the mountains; but as a rule they lie in careless
peace and amuse themselves with watching the lights
and shadows play over their slopes.</p>

<p>And with these mountains the plain, which is
peaceful and rich, and loves work, wages a perpetual
war, in a friendly spirit, however.</p>

<p>“It is quite enough,” says the plain to the mountains;
“if you set up your walls about me, that is
safety enough for me.”</p>

<p>But the mountains will not listen. They send
out long rows of hills and barren table-lands way
down to the lake. They raise great look-out towers
on every promontory, and leave the shores of the
lake so seldom that the plain can but rarely stretch
itself out by the soft, broad sands. But it does not
help to complain.</p>

<p>“You ought to be glad that we stand here,” the
mountains say. “Think of that time before Christmas,
when the icy fogs, day after day, rolled up from
the Löfven. We do you good service.”</p>

<p>The plain complains that it has no space and
an ugly view.</p>



<p>“You are so stupid,” answer the mountains; “if
you could only feel how it is blowing down here by
the lake. One needs at least a granite back and a
fir-tree jacket to withstand it. And, besides, you
can be glad to have us to look at.”</p>

<p>Yes, looking at the mountains, that is just what
the plain is doing. It knows so well all the wonderful
shiftings of light and shade, which pass over
them. It knows how they sink down in the noon-day
heat towards the horizon, low and a dim light-blue,
and in the morning or evening light raise their
venerable heights, clear blue as the sky at noon.</p>

<p>Sometimes the light falls so sharply over them
that they look green or dark-blue, and every separate
fir-tree, each path and cleft, is visible miles
away.</p>

<p>There are places where the mountains draw back
and allow the plain to come forward and gaze at the
lake. But when it sees the lake in its anger, hissing
and spitting like a wild-cat, or sees it covered
with that cold mist which happens when the sea-sprite
is busy with brewing or washing, then it
agrees that the mountains were right, and draws
back to its narrow prison again.</p>

<p>Men have cultivated the beautiful plain time out
of mind, and have built much there. Wherever a
stream in white foaming falls throws itself down the
slope, rose up factories and mills. On the bright,
open places, where the plain came down to the lake,
churches and vicarages were built; but on the edges
of the valley, half-way up the slope, on stony
grounds, where grain would not grow, lie farm-houses
and officers’ quarters, and here and there a
manor.</p>



<p>Still, in the twenties, this district was not nearly
so much cultivated as now. Many were the woods
and lakes and swamps which now can be tilled.
There were not so many people either, and they
earned their living partly by carting and day labor
at the many factories, partly by working at neighboring
places; agriculture could not feed them. At
that time they went dressed in homespun, ate oatcakes,
and were satisfied with a wage of ten cents a
day. Many were in great want; but life was often
made easier for them by a light and glad temper,
and by an inborn handiness and capability.</p>

<p>And all those three, the long lake, the rich plain,
and the blue mountains, made the most beautiful
scenery, and still do, just as the people are still to
this day, strong, brave and intelligent. Great progress
has been made, however, in prosperity and
culture.</p>

<p>May everything go well with those who live far
away by the long lake and the blue mountains! I
shall now recall some of their memories.</p>

<hr class="chap" />



</section></body></html>
