<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-20" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 id="II_CHAPTER_XX">CHAPTER XX<br />
<span class="smaller">KEVENHÜLLER</span></h2>

<p>In the year 1770, in Germany, the afterwards learned
and accomplished Kevenhüller was born. He was
the son of a count, and could have lived in lofty
palaces and ridden at the Emperor’s side if he had
so wished; but he had not.</p>

<p>He could have liked to fasten windmill sails
on the castle’s highest tower, turn the hall into
a locksmith’s workshop, and the boudoir into a
watch-maker’s. He would have liked to fill the
castle with whirling wheels and working levers.
But when he could not do it he left all the pomp
and apprenticed himself to a watch-maker. There
he learned everything there was to learn about cogwheels,
springs, and pendulums. He learned to make
sun-dials and star-dials, clocks with singing canary-birds
and horn-blowing shepherds, chimes which
filled a whole church-tower with their wonderful
machinery, and watch-works so small that they could
be set in a locket.</p>

<p>When he had got his patent of mastership, he
bound his knapsack on his back, took his stick in
his hand, and wandered from place to place to
study everything that went with rollers and wheels.
Kevenhüller was no ordinary watch-maker; he wished
to be a great inventor and to improve the world.</p>



<p>When he had so wandered through many lands, he
turned his steps towards Värmland, to there study
mill-wheels and mining. One beautiful summer
morning it so happened that he was crossing the
market-place of Karlstad. But that same beautiful
summer morning it had pleased the wood-nymph to
extend her walk as far as the town. The noble lady
came also across the market-place from the opposite
direction, and so met Kevenhüller.</p>

<p>That was a meeting for a watch-maker’s apprentice.
She had shining, green eyes, and a mass of
light hair, which almost reached the ground, and
she was dressed in green, changeable silk. She
was the most beautiful woman Kevenhüller had ever
seen.</p>

<p>He stood as if he had lost his wits, and stared at
her as she came towards him.</p>

<p>She came direct from the deepest thicket of the
wood, where the ferns are as high as trees, where
the giant firs shut out the sun, so that it can only
fall in golden drops on the yellow moss.</p>

<p>I should like to have been in Kevenhüller’s place,
to see her as she came with ferns and pine-needles
tangled in her yellow hair and a little black snake
about her neck.</p>

<p>How the people must have stared at her! Horses
bolted, frightened by her long, floating hair. The
street boys ran after her. The men dropped their
meat-axes to gape at her.</p>

<p>She herself went calm and majestic, only smiling
a little at the excitement, so that Kevenhüller saw
her small, pointed teeth shine between her red lips.</p>

<p>She had hung a cloak over her shoulders so that
none should see who she was; but as ill-luck would
have it, she had forgotten to cover her tail. It
dragged along the paving stones.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller saw the tail; he was sorry that a
noble lady should make herself the laughing-stock
of the town; so he bowed and said courteously:—</p>

<p>“Would it not please your Grace to lift your
train?”</p>

<p>The wood-nymph was touched, not only by his
kindness, but by his politeness. She stopped before
him and looked at him, so that he thought that
shining sparks passed from her eyes into his brain.
“Kevenhüller,” she said, “hereafter you shall be
able with your two hands to execute whatever work
you will, but only one of each kind.”</p>

<p>She said it and she could keep her word. For
who does not know that the wood-nymph has the
power to give genius and wonderful powers to those
who win her favor?</p>

<p>Kevenhüller remained in Karlstad and hired a
workshop there. He hammered and worked night
and day. In a week he had made a wonder. It was
a carriage, which went by itself. It went up hill
and down hill, went fast or slow, could be steered
and turned, be stopped and started, as one wished.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller became famous. He was so proud of
his carriage that he journeyed up to Stockholm to
show it to the king. He did not need to wait for
post-horses nor to scold ostlers. He proudly rode in
his own carriage and was there in a few hours.</p>

<p>He rode right up to the palace, and the king came
out with his court ladies and gentlemen and looked
at him. They could not praise him enough.</p>

<p>The king then said: “You might give me that
carriage, Kevenhüller.” And although he answered
no, the king persisted and wished to have the
carriage.</p>

<p>Then Kevenhüller saw that in the king’s train
stood a court lady with light hair and a green dress.
He recognized her, and he understood that it was
she who had advised the king to ask him for his
carriage. He was in despair. He could not bear
that another should have his carriage, nor did he
dare to say no to the king. Therefore he drove it
with such speed against the palace wall that it was
broken into a thousand pieces.</p>

<p>When he came home to Karlstad he tried to make
another carriage. But he could not. Then he was
dismayed at the gift the wood-nymph had given him.
He had left the life of ease at his father’s castle to
be a benefactor to many, not to make wonders which
only one could use. What good was it to him to be
a great master, yes, the greatest of all masters, if he
could not duplicate his marvels so that they were of
use to thousands.</p>

<p>And he so longed for quiet, sensible work that he
became a stone-cutter and mason. It was then he
built the great stone tower down by the west bridge,
and he meant to build walls and portals and courtyards,
ramparts and turrets, so that a veritable castle
should stand by the Klar River.</p>

<p>And there he should realize his childhood’s dream.
Everything which had to do with industry and handicraft
should have a place in the castle halls. White
millers and blacksmiths, watchmakers with green
shades before their strained eyes, dyers with dark
hands, weavers, turners, filers,—all should have
their work-shops in his castle.</p>

<p>And everything went well. Of the stones he
himself had hewn he had with his own hand built
the tower. He had fastened windmill sails on it,—for
the tower was to be a mill,—and now he
wanted to begin on the smithy.</p>

<p>But one day he stood and watched how the light,
strong wings turned before the wind. Then his old
longing came over him.</p>

<p>He shut himself in in his workshop, tasted no
food, took no rest, and worked unceasingly. At the
end of a week he had made a new marvel.</p>

<p>One day he climbed up on the roof of his tower
and began to fasten wings to his shoulders.</p>

<p>Two street boys saw him, and they gave a cry
which was heard through the whole town. They
started off; panting, they ran up the streets and
down the streets, knocking on all the doors, and
screaming as they ran:—</p>

<p>“Kevenhüller is going to fly! Kevenhüller is
going to fly!”</p>

<p>He stood calmly on the tower-roof and fastened on
his wings, and in the meantime crowds of people
came running through the narrow streets of old
Karlstad. Soon the bridge was black with them.
The market-place was packed, and the banks of the
river swarmed with people.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller at last got his wings on and set out.
He gave a couple of flaps with them, and then he
was out in the air. He lay and floated high above
the earth.</p>

<p>He drew in the air with long breaths; it was
strong and pure. His breast expanded, and the old
knights’ blood began to seethe in him. He tumbled
like a pigeon, he hovered like a hawk, his flight was
as swift as the swallow’s, as sure as the falcon’s. If
he had only been able to make such a pair of wings
for every one of them! If he had only been able to
give them all the power to raise themselves in this
pure air! He could not enjoy it alone. Ah, that
wood-nymph,—if he could only meet her!</p>

<p>Then he saw, with eyes which were almost blinded
by the dazzling sunlight, how some one came flying
towards him. Great wings like his own, and between
the wings floated a human body. He saw floating
yellow hair, billowy green silk, wild shining eyes.
It was she, it was she!</p>

<p>Kevenhüller did not stop to consider. With furious
speed he threw himself upon her to kiss her or
to strike her,—he was not sure which,—but at any
rate to force her to remove the curse from his existence.
He did not look where he was going; he saw
only the flying hair and the wild eyes. He came
close up to her and stretched out his arms to seize
her. But his wings caught in hers, and hers were
the stronger. His wings were torn and destroyed;
he himself was swung round and hurled down, he
knew not whither.</p>

<p>When he returned to consciousness he lay on the
roof of his own tower, with the broken flying-machine
by his side. He had flown right against his own
mill; the sails had caught him, whirled him round
a couple of times, and then thrown him down on the
tower roof.</p>

<p>So that was the end.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller was again a desperate man. He could
not bear the thought of honest work, and he did not
dare to use his magic power. If he should make
another wonder and should then destroy it, his heart
would break with sorrow. And if he did not destroy
it, he would certainly go mad at the thought that he
could not do good to others with it.</p>

<p>He looked up his knapsack and stick, let the mill
stand as it was, and decided to go out and search for
the wood-nymph.</p>

<p>In the course of his journeyings he came to Ekeby,
a few years before the major’s wife was driven out.
There he was well received, and there he remained.
The memories of his childhood came back to him,
and he allowed them to call him count. His hair
grew gray and his brain slept. He was so old that
he could no longer believe in the feats of his youth.
He was not the man who could work wonders. It
was not he who had made the automatic carriage and
the flying-machine. Oh, no,—tales, tales!</p>

<p>But then it happened that the major’s wife was
driven from Ekeby, and the pensioners were masters
of the great estate. Then a life began there which
had never been worse. A storm passed over the
land; men warred on earth, and souls in heaven.
Wolves came from Dovre with witches on their
backs, and the wood-nymph came to Ekeby.</p>

<p>The pensioners did not recognize her. They
thought that she was a poor and distressed woman
whom a cruel mother-in-law had hunted to despair.
So they gave her shelter, revered her like a queen,
and loved her like a child.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller alone saw who she was. At first he
was dazzled like the others. But one day she wore
a dress of green, shimmering silk, and when she had
that on, Kevenhüller recognized her.</p>

<p>There she sat on silken cushions, and all the old
men made themselves ridiculous to serve her. One
was cook and another footman; one reader, one
court-musician, one shoemaker; they all had their
occupations.</p>

<p>They said she was ill, the odious witch; but
Kevenhüller knew what that illness meant. She
was laughing at them all.</p>

<p>He warned the pensioners against her. “Look at
her small, pointed teeth,” he said, “and her wild,
shining eyes. She is the wood-nymph,—all evil is
about in these terrible times. I tell you she is the
wood-nymph, come hither for our ruin. I have seen
her before.”</p>

<p>But when Kevenhüller saw the wood-nymph and
had recognized her, the desire for work came over
him. It began to burn and seethe in his brain; his
fingers ached with longing to bend themselves about
hammer and file; he could hold out no longer. With
a bitter heart he put on his working-blouse and shut
himself in in an old smithy, which was to be his
workshop.</p>

<p>A cry went out from Ekeby over the whole of
Värmland:—</p>

<p>“Kevenhüller has begun to work!”</p>

<p>A new wonder was to see the light. What should
it be? Will he teach us to walk on the water, or to
raise a ladder to the stars?</p>

<p>One night, the first or second of October, he had
the wonder ready. He came out of the workshop
and had it in his hand. It was a wheel which turned
incessantly; as it turned, the spokes glowed like
fire, and it gave out warmth and light. Kevenhüller
had made a sun. When he came out of the workshop
with it, the night grew so light that the
sparrows began to chirp and the clouds to burn as if
at dawn.</p>



<p>There should never again be darkness or cold on
earth. His head whirled when he thought of it.
The sun would continue to rise and set, but when it
disappeared, thousands and thousands of his fire-wheels
should flame through the land, and the air
would quiver with warmth, as on the hottest summer-day.
Harvests should ripen in midwinter; wild
strawberries should cover the hillsides the whole
year round; the ice should never bind the water.</p>

<p>His fire-wheel should create a new world. It
should be furs to the poor and a sun to the miners.
It should give power to the mills, life to nature, a
new, rich, and happy existence to mankind. But at
the same time he knew that it was all a dream and
that the wood-nymph would never let him duplicate
his wheel. And in his anger and longing for
revenge, he thought that he would kill her, and
then he no longer knew what he was doing.</p>

<p>He went to the main building, and in the hall
under the stairs he put down his fire-wheel. It was
his intention to set fire to the house and burn up the
witch in it.</p>

<p>Then he went back to his workshop and sat there
silently listening.</p>

<p>There was shouting and crying outside. Now
they could see that a great deed was done.</p>

<p>Yes, run, scream, ring the alarm! But she is
burning in there, the wood-nymph whom you laid
on silken cushions.</p>

<p>May she writhe in torment, may she flee before
the flames from room to room! Ah, how the green
silk will blaze, and how the flames will play in her
torrents of hair! Courage, flames! courage! Catch
her, set fire to her! Witches burn! Fear not her
magic, flames! Let her burn! There is one who
for her sake must burn his whole life through.</p>

<p>Bells rang, wagons came rattling, pumps were
brought out, water was carried up from the lake,
people came running from all the neighboring villages.
There were cries and wailings and commands;
that was the roof, which had fallen in; there
was the terrible crackling and roaring of a fire. But
nothing disturbed Kevenhüller. He sat on the
chopping-block and rubbed his hands.</p>

<p>Then he heard a crash, as if the heavens had
fallen, and he started up in triumph. “Now it is
done!” he cried. “Now she cannot escape; now
she is crushed by the beams or burned up by the
flames. Now it is done.”</p>

<p>And he thought of the honor and glory of Ekeby
which had had to be sacrificed to get her out of the
world,—the magnificent halls, where so much happiness
had dwelt, the tables which had groaned
under dainty dishes, the precious old furniture, silver
and china, which could never be replaced—</p>

<p>And then he sprang up with a cry. His fire-wheel,
his sun, the model on which everything
depended, had he not put it under the stairs to cause
the fire?</p>

<p>Kevenhüller looked down on himself, paralyzed
with dismay.</p>

<p>“Am I going mad?” he said. “How could I do
such a thing?”</p>

<p>At the same moment the door of the workshop
opened and the wood-nymph walked in.</p>

<p>She stood on the threshold, smiling and fair.
Her green dress had neither hole nor stain, no smoke
darkened her yellow hair. She was just as he had
seen her in the market-place at Karlstad in his young
days; her tail hung between her feet, and she had
all the wildness and fragrance of the wood about
her.</p>

<p>“Ekeby is burning,” she said, and laughed.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller had the sledge-hammer lifted and
meant to throw it at her head, but then he saw that
she had his fire-wheel in her hand.</p>

<p>“See what I have saved for you,” she said.</p>

<p>Kevenhüller threw himself on his knees before
her.</p>

<p>“You have broken my carriage, you have rent my
wings, and you have ruined my life. Have grace,
have pity on me!”</p>

<p>She climbed up on the bench and sat there, just
as young and mischievous as when he saw her first.</p>

<p>“I see that you know who I am,” she said.</p>

<p>“I know you, I have always known you,” said
the unfortunate man; “you are genius. But set me
free! Take back your gift! Let me be an ordinary
person! Why do you persecute me? Why do you
destroy me?”</p>

<p>“Madman,” said the wood-nymph, “I have never
wished you any harm. I gave you a great reward;
but I can also take it from you if you wish. But
consider well. You will repent it.”</p>

<p>“No, no!” he cried; “take from me the power of
working wonders!”</p>

<p>“First, you must destroy this,” she said, and
threw the fire-wheel on the ground in front of him.</p>

<p>He did not hesitate. He swung the sledge-hammer
over the shining sun; sparks flew about the
room, splinters and flames danced about him, and
then his last wonder lay in fragments.</p>



<p>“Yes, so I take my gift from you,” said the wood-nymph.
As she stood in the door and the glare
from the fire streamed over her, he looked at her for
the last time. More beautiful than ever before, she
seemed to him, and no longer malicious, only stern
and proud.</p>

<p>“Madman,” she said, “did I ever forbid you to let
others copy your works? I only wished to protect
the man of genius from a mechanic’s labor.”</p>

<p>Whereupon she went. Kevenhüller was insane
for a couple of days. Then he was as usual again.</p>

<p>But in his madness he had burned down Ekeby.
No one was hurt. Still, it was a great sorrow to the
pensioners that the hospitable home, where they had
enjoyed so many good things, should suffer such
injury in their time.</p>

<hr class="chap" />



</section></body></html>
